=head1 NAME

B<rzh> - Receive ZMODEM Here

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<rzh> [B<-i>|B<-q>] [I<directory>]

To transfer the /etc/hosts file on tt.asplode.com to the current directory:

  $ rzh
  $ ssh www.asplode.com
  $ sz /etc/hosts
  173 bytes sent in 0.3 seconds.
  $ exit		# exits the ssh session
  $ exit		# exits the rzh session

=head1 DESCRIPTION

rzh forks itself ot the background and handles any zmodem transfer
requests that it sees coming over the wire.
is often easier than using scp or sftp.
It can also be useful for copying files on the local machine.

=head1 OPTIONS

Specify the directory that you'd like to receive files to on the
command line.  If no directory is supplied, the current directory
is used.

=over 8

=item B<-i> B<--info>

Prints a brief message telling if rzh is currently running on the
local shell.

=item B<-q> B<--quiet>

Suppresses the printing of status messages.
Error messages are still printed to stderr.

=item B<-h> B<--help>

Output a quick usage summary.

=item B<-V> B<--version>

Prints the version and exits.

=item B<--rz>

Specifies the location and arguments for the rz program.
By default rzh receives files using "/usr/bin/rz" with
no arguments.

You must specify the full path to the executable -- rzh doesn't
use the PATH variable.  Also, rzh doesn't currently support quoting
or backslashing in the argument list (see BUGS).

  # rz normally skips duplicate files.  This will cause rz
  # to overwrite them instead.
  rzh --rz='/usr/bin/rz -y'

  # put this in your .bashrc to disable timeouts
  # (remember to disable timeouts when running sz as well)
  alias rzh="rzh --rz='/usr/bin/rz --no-timeout'"

=back

=head1 KEYS

rzh reads keyboard input while a transfer is going on.  Here are
the keys that it recognizes:

=over 4

=item ESC ^C q Q

Cancels the current transfer.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item SHELL

Specifies the shell that rzh should use.

=item RZHDIR

If you're currently running rzh, this specifies the full path
to the download directory.

=back

=head1 BUGS

rzh suffers from all rz/sz bugs.
For instance, with lrzsz, try calling sz with an invalid filename.
Sometimes it will print an error, sometimes it will hang.
There's not much rzh can do about this.

rzh doesn't support quoting within --rz and --shell.
For instance, --rz='/bin/cmd --prompt="a b"' will cause rzh to
call /bin/cmd with two arguments '"a', and 'b"'.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<rz(1)>, L<sz(1)>

=head1 AUTHOR

=over 4

=item Scott Bronson <S<bronson@rinspin.com>>

=back

=cut
